The traditional brick making industry is the backbone of urban development throughout South Asia. It employs millions of people and hundreds of thousands of animals working in extremely hazardous and tough conditions. It also generates highly pollutant emissions. From the sourcing of its workforce to its socio, economic and cultural underlying factors, the brick making industry is complex and has manifold dimensions that make addressing the challenges it faces extremely difficult. 
Despite its significant impact on people, animals and the environment, the traditional brick making industry has received little political attention and remains largely free from operating without being made accountable for its use and treatment of workers and animals, working conditions and its impact on the environment. 
This report aims to increase knowledge and understanding of the brick making industry in South Asia with a particular focus on four countries - Afghanistan, India, Nepal and Pakistan. It focuses on the critical linkages between the human, animal and environmental sectors and highlights the main challenges faced by the industry today, as well as the political, economic, social and cultural obstacles to change. It seeks to foster a constructive dialogue with all key stakeholders at the national, regional and international levels, identify pathways for making positive, sustainable changes, and for promoting a collaborative approach that could transform the industry in the region. 
The first chapter of the report gives an overview of brick kiln technologies and brick production globally, whilst the second chapter focuses on the use of traditional brick making in South Asia, providing a comprehensive explanation of the sourcing and use of human and animal workers. 
Chapter Three concentrates on the environmental impact of the traditional brick kiln technologies on all forms of life including human lives. It considers the main barriers to modernising the brick making industry in the region and highlights the inadequate policy and legal framework, in particular the weak implementation of instruments available to regulate or prohibit the use of harmful technologies. Finally, it considers key strategies for change and examples of successful and positive initiatives that are currently being implemented. 
Chapter Four looks at the use of human labour in the kilns. It puts the spotlight on the highly prevalent illegal practices of bonded and child labour, and the workers’ extreme vulnerability and precarious living and working conditions, leading to a number of detrimental health consequences. It then provides an overview of the policy and legal environment relevant to human labour in the brick kilns, in particular the ILO Conventions, and acknowledges the similarities with the environmental sector around the lack of, or weak implementation and enforcement of the instruments available. Finally, chapter Four considers key strategies for change as well as examples of projects that have led to the improvement of workers’ conditions in the kilns. 
Chapter Five focuses on the use of animals in the brick kilns. It provides the first comprehensive account of their contribution to the traditional brick making industry. The Chapter considers their sourcing, their roles in the brick kilns, their living and working conditions and the impact on their health and welfare. It then highlights the current limitations of the policy and legal framework for working animals in the brick kilns, including the lack of appropriate instruments and institutional anchors at the national and international levels. It does however note the opportunities brought on by new global standards for working equine animals. Finally, the Chapter highlights key approaches to improve the welfare of working animals that have been successfully implemented. 
Having provided a comprehensive overview of the main sectors and issues pertinent to the traditional brick kilns, the last chapter sets out the key common challenges across the three sectors and explores opportunities to raise the visibility of the industry and to build momentum and multi- sectoral and multi-stakeholder collaboration and action towards transforming the traditional brick making industry in South Asia. It concludes with a set of recommendations aimed at national, regional and global policy makers and influencers, to be discussed at the SAIEVAC convened Regional Conference on the Brick Kilns in South Asia held in Nepal in January 2017. 
